[DOCS] Describe how to override PSR-14 event listeners (#3900)
TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Reference-CoreApi: Documentation/ApiOverview/Events/EventDispatcher/Index.rst

Dispatching an event
--------------------

This quick start section shows how to create your own event class and dispatch it.
If you just want to listen on an existing event, see section

> :ref:`_EventDispatcherImplementation`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`EventDispatcherImplementation`.
```

No starting underscore in the reference, only in the anchor.

The listeners
-------------

Extensions and PHP packages can add listeners that are registered via YAML (or starting

> with TYPO3 v13 also natively in :ref:`PHP using attributes <EventDispatcherImplementation>`). They

Reviewer: Here you have to take care when backporting. I suggest to remove the mentioning of the attributes for this PR and add it in a separate PR (then only for main).

Author: IMO when people are reading the documentation of this in a v11/v12 environment it would be good for adoption and getting "people hooked" ;) to spread the word about the cool new attributes? It does mention v13 specifically, so I'd really like to keep it not only for preventing the hassle of an additional PR and drifting changes in this section?

Reviewer: No, this is not how the docs work, this is not marketing/sales where we want to sell something.
When people have to look up the docs because of a problem or feature they want to implement, they can't go to the customer and say: Hey, I want to use the cool attributes, let's upgrade spontaneously to v13.0.
And in older versions they can't "adopt" the attribute.
Besides of that: the attribute is just another way of registering an event listener. Nothing else.

are usually associated to :php:`Event` objects by the fully-qualified class name
of the event to be listened on. It is the task of the listener provider to
provide configuration mechanisms to represent this relationship.

If multiple event listeners for a specific event are registered, their order can

> be configured or an event listener can also be overridden with a different one.

Reviewer: I suggest to write "or an existing event listener" to emphasize that.

Author: Good idea, changed.

> The TYPO3 `Configuration` backend module reveals an easy overview of all registered

Reviewer: We use the guilabel role when mentioning modules, also the full path:

    :guilabel:`System > Configuration`

Additionally, please mention that the lowlevel system extension must be active for the Configuration module to be available. Additionally, no need to write "TYPO3 backend module", just "backend module" is sufficient.

NB: Please check if the main module is really System.

Author: Thanks! Yes, Configuration is in System. Addressed both things, very good. I'll try to remember this.

of the event to be listened on. It is the task of the listener provider to
provide configuration mechanisms to represent this relationship.

If multiple event listeners for a specific event are registered, their order can
be configured or an existing event listener can also be overridden with a different one.

The :guilabel:`System > Configuration > Event Listeners (PSR-14)` backend module (requires

> the system extension :doc:`lowlevel <ext_lowlevel:Index>`) reveals an easy overview of all registered

Reviewer: What is an "easy overview"? Maybe "basiv overview" or just "overview"?

> the system extension :doc:`lowlevel <ext_lowlevel:Index>`) reveals an easy overview of all registered

Author: ```suggestion
the system extension :doc:`lowlevel <ext_lowlevel:Index>`) reveals an overview of all registered
```

following properties (which are all optional):

:php:`identifier`
    A unique identifier should be declared which identifies the event listener,
    and orderings can be build upon the identifier. If this property is not
    explicitly defined, the service name is automatically used instead.

:php:`before`
    This property allows a custom sorting of registered listeners. The listener
    is then dispatched before the given listener. The value is the identifier of

>     another event listener.

Reviewer: It can be multiple ones when I remember correctly, separated by comma. So, plural is correct.

>     another event listener.

Author: ```suggestion
    another event listeners.
```

:php:`after`
    This property allows a custom sorting of registered listeners. The listener

>     is then dispatched after the given listener. The value is the identifier of

Author: ```suggestion
    is then dispatched after the given listener. The values are the identifier(s) of
```

>     another event listener.

Reviewer: Here too.

:php:`event`
    The fully-qualified class name (FQCN) of the dispatched event, that the
    listener wants to react to. It is recommended to not specify this property,
    but to use the FQCN as type declaration of the argument within the dispatched method

>     (usually :php:`__invoke(EventName $event) ` unless overridden with a custom :php:`method`).

Reviewer: I don't understand this: "unless overridden with a custom method" in combination with the type declaration. Additionally, method is not a PHP method, just a word, so no need to use the php role.

Author: It means, you can define your own method other than "__invoke". But I agree we could simplify this sentence.

```suggestion
    (usually :php:`__invoke(EventName $event)`).
```

    File; EXT:{extkey}/Configuration/Services.yaml
..  _EventDispatcherRegistration:

> Registering the event listener via :file:`Services.yaml` (legacy)

Reviewer: This is not legacy, it is valid to register a listener that way (also in the future).

Author: Oh, ok. I thought this way was frowned upon. Changed.

-----------------------------------------------------------------

..  versionadded:: 13.0
    If using the PHP attribute :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Attribute\AsEventListener`
    to configure an event listener, the registration in the
    :file:`Configuration/Services.yaml` file is not necessary anymore.

>     However, extensions also supporting TYPO3 v12 may still

Reviewer: Again, this makes backporting harder. Please move this in a separate PR only applied to main afterwards.

Author: Agreed, I see. Might not even be needed as a separate PR, it's a non-information, when reading again.

:yaml:`event` is dispatched. The :yaml:`identifier` is a common name, so
orderings can be built upon the identifier, the optional :yaml:`before` and
:yaml:`after` attributes allow for custom sorting against the :yaml:`identifier`

> of other listeners. If no :yaml:`identifier` is specified, the fully qualified

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of other listeners. If no :yaml:`identifier` is specified, the fully-qualified
```

The custom PHP class :php:`\MyVendor\MyExtension\EventListener\NullMailer`
serves as the listener whose :php:`handleEvent()` method is called, once the

> :yaml:`event` is dispatched. The name of the listened event is specified as

Reviewer: To be precise: A method of a listener can have multiple type declarations for an event, like

    __invoke(Event1|Event2 $event)

Author: That would maybe be another addition, you could create it as its own PR to not further make this more complicated? IMO addressing implementing multiple events needs a few sentences wihch are beyond my scope at this point (adressing to override event listeners).

Read :ref:`how to configure dependency injection in extensions <dependency-injection-in-extensions>`.

Existing event listeners can be overridden by custom implementations. For example,
:file:`EXT:news/Configuration/Services.yaml` could listen on the event
:php:`TYPO3\CMS\Frontend\Event\ModifyHrefLangTagsEvent`:

..  literalinclude:: _ServicesOverrideBase.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :caption: EXT:my_extension/Configuration/Services.yaml

If you want to replace this event listener with your custom implementation, your extension can
achieve this by specifying:

> ..  literalinclude:: _ServicesOverrideBase.yaml

Reviewer 2: Two times `_ServicesOverrideBase.yaml` - should this not be the `_ServicesOverrideCustom.yaml` for the second one ?

Author: Yes, copypasta, thanks!

    :language: yaml
    :caption: EXT:my_extension/Configuration/Services.yaml

Make sure that you set the :yaml:`identifier` attribute to exactly the string that the
original implementation uses. If that attribute is not mentioned specifically in the original
implementation, the fully qualified name of the :php:`EventListener` class is used. So if
:yaml:`identifier: 'ext-news/modify-hreflang'` would not be there, the identifier would be set
to :yaml:`identifier: 'GeorgRinger\News\Seo\HrefLangEvent'` and you would need to use that
identifier in your implementation.

Note that overriding listeners requires your extension to declare a dependency on the :php:`EXT:news`
extension (through :file:`composer.json`). This ensures the loading order allows your extension

> to be evaluated after the extension you want to override.

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest to add a additional mentioning that the same encounts for a `ext_emconf.php` for non-composer installations and upload to TER.

Author: Good note, I always forget that ext_emconf still has some usage.

Read :ref:`how to configure dependency injection in extensions <dependency-injection-in-extensions>`.

Existing event listeners can be overridden by custom implementations. For example,

> :file:`EXT:news/Configuration/Services.yaml` could listen on the event

Reviewer: EXT:news is the wrong one.

Author: Changed to some_extension

> :php:`TYPO3\CMS\Frontend\Event\ModifyHrefLangTagsEvent`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Frontend\Event\ModifyHrefLangTagsEvent`:
```

..  literalinclude:: _ServicesOverrideBase.yaml
    :language: yaml

>     :caption: EXT:my_extension/Configuration/Services.yaml

Reviewer: EXT:my_extension is the wrong one.

Author: Changed to some_extension

If you want to replace this event listener with your custom implementation, your extension can
achieve this by specifying:

..  literalinclude:: _ServicesOverrideCustom.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :caption: EXT:my_extension/Configuration/Services.yaml

Make sure that you set the :yaml:`identifier` attribute to exactly the string that the

> original implementation uses. If that attribute is not mentioned specifically in the original

Reviewer: ```suggestion
original implementation uses. If the identifier is not mentioned specifically in the original
```

Event listeners can be tagged by a PHP attribute in v13. Better use not that word for not confusing the reader ...

Author: Ack, done

> implementation, the fully qualified name of the :php:`EventListener` class is used. So if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
implementation, the fully-qualified name of the event listener class is used. So if
```

No need to use the php text role.

Author: good suggestion, done

> :yaml:`identifier: 'ext-someExtension/modify-hreflang'` would not be there, the identifier would be set

Reviewer: Would prefer ext-some-extension to not mix up dashed with camel case

to :yaml:`identifier: 'SomeVendor\SomeExtension\Seo\HrefLangEvent'` and you would need to use that
identifier in your implementation.

Note that overriding listeners requires your extension to declare a dependency on the :php:`EXT:some_extension`

> extension (through :file:`composer.json`, or for non-composer mode :file:`ext_emconf.php`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extension (through :file:`composer.json`, or for non-Composer mode :file:`ext_emconf.php`).
```

> This ensures the loading order allows your extension to be evaluated after the extension you want

Reviewer: "... ensures the loading order allows ..." sounds strange.

> This ensures the a proper loading order, so your extension is processed after the extension you want

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ensures a proper loading order, so your extension is processed after the extension you want
```

Read :ref:`how to configure dependency injection in extensions <dependency-injection-in-extensions>`.

..  index:: Override Event Listener; Event override
..  _EventListenerOverride:

Overriding event listeners
--------------------------

Existing event listeners can be overridden by custom implementations. This can be
performed via :file:`EXT:some_extension/Configuration/Services.yaml`.

For example, a third-party extension listens on the event
:php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Frontend\Event\ModifyHrefLangTagsEvent` with the following code:

..  literalinclude:: _ServicesOverrideBase.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :caption: EXT:some_extension/Configuration/Services.yaml

If you want to replace this event listener with your custom implementation, your extension can
achieve this by specifying:

..  literalinclude:: _ServicesOverrideCustom.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :caption: EXT:my_extension/Configuration/Services.yaml

..  note::

    When overriding an event listener, be sure to check whatever the

>     listener provided as changes to an event. Your own event listener

Reviewer: Had to read it multiple times: "to check whatever the listener provided as changes to an event".

What do you want to say?

Author: I wanted to indicate that one should look up the extension that you override. See what changes the original extension made to the event data. And then ensure, that your custom event listener implementation of the override still performs the needed manipulations.

How about this instead:

"When overriden an event listener, investigate the original implementation. Ensure that your own event listener still performs all needed modifications to the event data, because the original implementation will no longer take effect. If the original extension for example set a property to a specific value, this is now in your responsibility to manage."

    implementation is now responsible for any functionality, because
    the original listener will no longer be executed.

Make sure that you set the `identifier` property to exactly
the string which the original implementation uses. If the identifier is not mentioned specifically

> in the original implementation, the service name (usually the fully-qualified name of the event

Author: How about this then:

```suggestion
in the original implementation, the service name (when unspecified, the fully-qualified name of the event
```

listener class) is used. You can inspect that identifier in the
:guilabel:`System > Configuration > Event Listeners (PSR-14)` backend module (requires the system extension
:doc:`lowlevel <ext_lowlevel:Index>`), see :ref:`EventDebugging`. In this example,

> if :yaml:`identifier: 'ext-some-extension/modify-hreflang'` would not be there, the identifier

Reviewer: "would not be there" -> "is not defined"?

> if :yaml:`identifier: 'ext-some-extension/modify-hreflang'` would not be there, the identifier

Author: ```suggestion
if :yaml:`identifier: 'ext-some-extension/modify-hreflang'` is not defined, the identifier
```

will be set to :yaml:`identifier: 'SomeVendor\SomeExtension\Seo\HrefLangEventListener'` and you could
use that identifier in your implementation.

..  note::

>     Note that overriding listeners requires your extension to declare a dependency on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Overriding listeners requires your extension to declare a dependency on the
```

"Note" is already the admonition.

Read :ref:`how to configure dependency injection in extensions <dependency-injection-in-extensions>`.

..  index:: Override Event Listener; Event override
..  _EventListenerOverride:

Overriding event listeners
--------------------------

Existing event listeners can be overridden by custom implementations. This can be
performed with both methods, using the PHP :php:`#[AsEventListener}` attribute or
via :file:`EXT:some_extension/Configuration/Services.yaml`.

For example, if a third-party extension listens on the event
:php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Frontend\Event\ModifyHrefLangTagsEvent` with the following code:

..  literalinclude:: _ServicesOverrideBase.php
    :language: php
    :caption: EXT:some_extension/Classes/EventListener/SeoEvent.php

> or via :file:`Services.yaml` legacy declaration:

Reviewer: Please add an admonition:

When overriding an event listener you have to take care about changes in the original event listener and adjust your event listener accordingly

Or something like that.

Author: I added a `note` (right one?) for this, but rephrased it to what I believe you wanted to state. Please check if that was your intention to describe?

Reviewer: Depends, "note" is okay, we have also "caution". Do as you think ;-)

If you want to replace this event listener with your custom implementation, your extension can
achieve this by specifying:

..  literalinclude:: _ServicesOverrideCustom.php
    :language: yaml
    :caption: EXT:my_extension/Configuration/Classes/EventListener/MySeoEvent.php

or via :file:`Services.yaml` legacy declaration:

..  literalinclude:: _ServicesOverrideCustom.yaml
    :language: yaml
    :caption: EXT:my_extension/Configuration/Services.yaml

Make sure that you set the `identifier` property (either in YAML or the PHP attribute) to exactly
the string that the original implementation uses. If the identifier is not mentioned specifically

> in the original implementation, the service name (usually the fully-qualified name of the event

Reviewer: and unusually? When not defined, it is always the FQCN - or do I miss something?

Author: Inside services.yaml you are free what you use as a service name, it must not be a FQCN, it can be any unique string. FQCNs are recommended, but not required. So it falls back to a SERVICE NAME, not a FQCN actually. That's why I used "usually the FQCN", because sane people should use that, but it can't be ensure :D

> listener class) is used. You can inspect that identifier in the `Configuration` backend module, see

Reviewer: Please use guilabel and the full path to the module (again, mention lowlevel sysext).

Author: done

*   When creating a new event PHP class, it is recommended to add an
    :php:`Event` suffix to the PHP class, and to move it into an appropriate

>     folder like :php:`Classes/EventListener` to easily discover events provided by a

Reviewer: Nope, it is about events, so Classes/Event is correct.

Author: Oh, very important note. I mixed this up, and actually the examples where missing the "Listener" suffix, too! Addressed this.

I also added a second "best practice" to recommend this.

Reviewer: You don't need in the examples the Listener suffix. For example, in my projects I don't use it, the class names are mostly already long, so no need to add "Listener" to it. You can add it, or you can omit it, I think, there is no best practise.
